So to begin, a simple statement: betting and insurance companies have identical business models. A bold conjecture one might proclaim, but I assure you that it is more than just opinion. I hope that through fact and clear reasoning I can persuade the reader into agreement.

For this to be true, either company would be have to be seen as operating as the other. And it hardly ever is, but this is so for (at least two) main reasons:

* They are seen to be operating in two difference sectors: insurance is smack in the middle of the [financial services](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_services) industry, while gambling/betting is... well... somewhere else. But certainly not a financial service.
* Their reputations are rather different. Insurance is only _slightly_ evil — think "doesn't pay to flood/hurricane/<your natural disaster here> victims", but is still useful. Gambling is _very_ evil.

But is an insurance company not in the business of gambling? Specifically, if you comprehensively ensure your car, what sort of binding agreement are you getting into? Consider the obligations of both parties. You, as the insured party are paying a premium, which is generally spread over the duration of the agreement. The insurer pays nothing, providing that you don't make a claim. Conversely, the insurer pays out a large sum (typically much larger than the premium) in the event that you take out a (legitimate) claim. (And providing that the claim _significantly_ eclipses the excess, otherwise most of us would rather pay out of pocket — not only due to the excess, but also due to losing our coveted no-claims bonus.)

So the insurer _is betting against you_; specifically, the insurer is betting on you failing to crash your car. You, on the other hand, are betting that you _will_ crash your car (or lose/damage some other property, you get the drift).

I know this is beginning to sound dramatic and rather uncomfortable. We started out with a simple discussion on how two companies differ (or not) in their operating model, and have since reduced to an inquest of the reader. (And you thought betting was evil.) But let me assure you, nothing is further from the truth. To understand why, you need to understand [utility theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utility). (If you have any time to spare, which I'm almost certain of — given your presence here — I suggest acquainting with some of the works of the Bernoulli brothers.) In a highly condensed summary, the value of money isn't a constant — it has incremental value which diminishes as our wealth grows. This is the very reason why a regular battler would likely stop to pick up a stray $5 note on the pavement, but a well-to-do individual is likely to walk right by. A more practical (and palatable) rationalisation is that most of us aren't _really_ convinced of crashing their cars, but the substantial downside of this dire event is persuading us to assume the absolute worst case scenario. (Not just a minor ding, but a complete write-off.)

The fact remains: the insurer is betting on you failing to crash your car. Note the irony: _the insurer has greater faith in you than you have in yourself_. (I apologise, I couldn't help myself there.) The size of your premium is a careful calculation based on a fair number of factors — your driving history, age, gender, the model of your car, the neighbourhood you reside in — factors that influence your propensity to crash. The exact composition of factors (their weights) are derived from a regression model, trained on a very large dataset. In other words, the insurer believes to be _better informed than the average driver of the likelihood of them crashing_. So much so that they are willing to bet on it and offer you a premium which is sufficiently large for them to make a handsome profit, while at the same time appearing to offer genuine value to the consumer, 'piece of mind' and all that jazz. Casting a (hopefully obvious) parallel to the gambling world: the premium is your stake and the payout/premium ratio is your betting odds.
